    MemoriesDB: A Temporal-Semantic-Relational Database for
                 Long-Term Agent Memory
                Modeling Experience as a Graph of Temporal–Semantic Surfaces

                                             Joel “val” Ward
                                       CircleClick Labs, Austin TX
                                             val@ai.ccl.io
                                              October 28, 2025

                                                    Abstract
         We introduce MemoriesDB, a unified data architecture designed to avoid decoherence across time,
     meaning, and relation in long-term computational memory. Each memory is a time–semantic–relational
     entity—a structure that simultaneously encodes when an event occurred, what it means, and how it
     connects to other events. Built initially atop PostgreSQL with pgvector extensions, MemoriesDB
     combines the properties of a time-series datastore, a vector database, and a graph system within a single
     append-only schema. Each memory is represented as a vertex uniquely labeled by its microsecond
     timestamp and accompanied by low– and high–dimensional normalized embeddings that capture semantic
     context. Directed edges between memories form labeled relations with per-edge metadata, enabling
     multiple contextual links between the same vertices. Together these constructs form a time-indexed stack
     of temporal–semantic surfaces, where edges project as directional arrows in a 1+1-dimensional similarity
     field, tracing the evolution of meaning through time while maintaining cross-temporal coherence. This
     formulation supports efficient time-bounded retrieval, hybrid semantic search, and lightweight structural
     reasoning in a single query path. A working prototype demonstrates scalable recall and contextual
     reinforcement using standard relational infrastructure, and we discuss extensions toward a columnar
     backend, distributed clustering, and emergent topic modeling.

Keywords: vector database, time-series, graph database, agent memory, semantic retrieval, hybrid architecture,
knowledge graph


1    Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have become the de facto substrate for modern artificial intelligence, yet they
struggle to maintain long-term coherence. As their interactions extend over hours, days, or weeks, they suffer
from what can be described as context decoherence: previously established facts and intentions drift out
of scope, while the continuity of reasoning fragments into disjoint episodes. Existing architectures typically
address this problem through sliding windows, retrieval-augmented generation (RAG), or episodic caches.
While these techniques mitigate token limits, they do not provide a persistent substrate that encodes the
temporal, semantic, and relational structure of an agent’s experience. Without such a substrate, continuity
must be reconstructed ad hoc from text, and accumulated knowledge cannot be reasoned about as a coherent
whole. They fail to preserve the evolving structure of experience that underlies reasoning and long-horizon
planning.
    MemoriesDB [1] addresses this gap by treating memories as a first-class data system. It is a unified
store in which every record—called a memory—is simultaneously a temporal event, a semantic vector, and
a relational node (vertex). These three dimensions—time, meaning, and connection—form the core triality
of the system. By integrating them into one append-only schema, MemoriesDB preserves both the sequence
and the structure of experience, allowing agents to retrieve relevant information without losing the narrative
thread that binds their actions together. Each labelled vertex represents a contextual embedding at a specific
moment in time, while weighted edges capture relationship, strength, and confidence.


                                                        1
    This design yields three key advantages. It
   1. enables persistent self-reference: agents can recall and reason over their own past states without ex-
      ternal indexing.
   2. provides a natural substrate for contextual inference—by traversing similarity edges, an agent can
      reconstruct causal chains across time.
   3. scales pragmatically: updates occur asynchronously through PubSub channels, supporting distributed
      agents without retraining the core model.
    The result is an architecture that turns a stateless LLM into a continuous learning system capable of
temporal reasoning and identity formation. While not yet a complete cognitive model, this work represents a
concrete step toward persistent, graph-grounded intelligence—an essential component in the path to artificial
general intelligence (AGI).

1.1    From fragments to coherence
Human memory is not merely a sequence of tokens but a continuously evolving network of experiences.
Coherence emerges from the interplay of three processes: (i) temporal ordering, which anchors experiences
in chronology; (ii) semantic association, which links conceptually similar events; and (iii) structural relation,
which encodes causal, conversational, or hierarchical connections. Most current memory systems capture only
one of these axes. Vector databases represent meaning but not time or structure; time-series databases record
sequence but not semantics; graph databases encode structure but lack a metric of similarity. MemoriesDB
fuses all three into a single model where each stored experience can be queried across time, meaning, and
relation simultaneously.
    This design allows the system to represent memory as geometry. Each record occupies a position within
a time-indexed graph of temporal–semantic surfaces. Within this geometry, the direction and weight of
edges express how meaning propagates through time—preserving coherence across otherwise distant contexts.
Queries can project along any axis or combination thereof: for example, “retrieve events semantically related
to this idea within the past 24 hours,” or “find summaries that link these two topics.” The resulting framework
treats recall as a navigation problem through a coherent spatiotemporal field rather than a static search in
a single embedding space, thus escaping from the dreaded ”curse of dimensionality” problem.

1.2    Design principles
The design of MemoriesDB follows four principles:
   • Append-only architecture: All data are immutable once written. New memories extend the timeline
     rather than overwrite prior state. This approach ensures auditability, chronological integrity, and
     natural support for time-bounded queries.
   • Unified representation: Each memory is a typed vertex with normalized embeddings and JSON
     metadata. Edges are labeled, directional, and capable of carrying per-edge metadata, allowing multiple
     relations between the same vertices.
   • Compositional geometry: MemoriesDB models experience as a directed stack of 1+1-dimensional
     similarity fields—each vertex defines a local temporal–semantic plane. Edges project across these
     planes, forming a layered structure that preserves local continuity and global coherence.
   • Practical implementation: The current prototype runs on standard relational infrastructure (Post-
     greSQL with pgvector) and supports time-bounded recall, hybrid vector–SQL queries, and graph traver-
     sal. The system is designed for seamless migration to a columnar Parquet backend for distributed
     scaling.

1.3    Contributions
This paper makes the following contributions:
   • A unified data model that integrates time, semantic embeddings, and relational edges in a single
     append-only store.


                                                       2
    • A geometric formulation of memory as a time-indexed graph of temporal–semantic surfaces, preserving
      coherence across long horizons.
    • A working implementation demonstrating efficient time-bounded recall and hybrid semantic–structural
      queries on commodity SQL infrastructure.

    • A research framework for analyzing long-horizon agent cognition, semantic drift, and emergent topic
      structure.

1.4     Relation to prior work
Prior research on vector databases, such as FAISS [2], Milvus [3], and pgvector [4], focuses on approximate
nearest-neighbor retrieval in embedding space. Time-series databases like InfluxDB and TimescaleDB [5] op-
timize for chronological queries but lack semantic representations. Graph databases, including Neo4j [6] and
TigerGraph [7], specialize in topology but require external embedding layers to capture meaning. Memo-
riesDB unifies these paradigms by embedding semantic vectors and graph relations directly into a temporally
ordered schema, enabling hybrid queries without cross-system joins. Each addresses a single dimension of
memory—semantic, temporal, or structural—but not all three simultaneously.
    Beyond storage, MemoriesDB also relates conceptually to cognitive architectures such as ACT-R [8]
and Soar [9], as well as retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) approaches [10] and large models like GPT-
4 [11]. These systems highlight the importance of long-term structure, yet none provide a general-purpose
data substrate capable of maintaining high-dimensional embeddings, temporal metadata, and graph relations
under a single query model.

1.5     Overview
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows:

    • Section 2 describes the data model and geometric formulation of memory as time, meaning, and
      relation.
    • Section 3 outlines the implementation on PostgreSQL and discusses query patterns for retrieval and
      reinforcement.
    • Section 4 evaluates scalability and coherence retention under growing timelines.

    • Section 5 explores future extensions—including a Parquet-backed columnar engine, distributed cluster-
      ing, and automated topic discovery—and situates MemoriesDB within the broader pursuit of coherent,
      long-horizon cognition.


2     Data Model and Geometry
MemoriesDB represents experience as a unified mathematical object that integrates temporal ordering,
semantic representation, and relational connectivity. This section defines the core data structures, presents
the geometric interpretation that underlies the system’s coherence, and outlines how retrieval operates within
this space.

2.1     The Memory Record
Each record in MemoriesDB is a memory Mi defined by the tuple

                                            Mi = (ti , κi , Vi , mi )                                      (1)

where
    • ti ∈ R is the unique temporal coordinate of the memory;



                                                       3
    • κi is a categorical kind label describing the record type (e.g., message, observation, summary, or state);
                  (1)   (2)       (k)
    • Vi = {vi , vi , . . . , vi } is a collection of normalized sub-embeddings, each capturing a different
      representational view of the same memory (e.g., semantic, lexical, trigram, summary);
    • mi is a metadata map containing arbitrary key–value annotations (agent ID, topic tags, importance,
      etc.).
   This formulation generalizes the notion of a single semantic vector to a multi-view representation. Each
                (n)
sub-embedding vi may differ in dimensionality, feature basis, or retrieval objective.1

Practical instantiation
   In the current prototype, Vi typically contains both low- and high–dimensional semantic embeddings
  (L)  (H)
(vi , vi ), with optional lexical or trigram projections.2

Retrieval function
  From a retrieval perspective, the system treats each memory as

                                                  Mi = (ti , κi , vfuse,i , mi )                                              (2)

where the fusion operator ffuse aggregates the sub-embeddings

                                                      vfuse,i = ffuse (Vi )

The function ffuse may implement a weighted combination, Reciprocal Rank Fusion (RRF) [14], or another
hybrid ranking strategy. This approach provides flexibility to integrate new embedding types without altering
the storage schema.
    This multi-view memory representation forms the foundation for the distance and coherence metrics
introduced in Section 2.4.

2.2     Edges and Relations
Directed relations between memories are expressed as labeled edges:

                                            Eij = (Mi → Mj , ρij , Wij , mij )                                                (3)

where ρ is a relation label (e.g., reply, summary-of, related-to), Wij is weight, and mij is a metadata map
attached to that specific edge. Multiple labeled edges may exist between the same vertex pair, forming a
directed multigraph. Furthermore, W is defined as

                                                W = (wstrength , wconfidence )

   Each edge originates from the source plane of Mi and projects to the origin of its destination Mj . This
projection defines a local vector

                                                       eij = (∆tij , sij )
                                                                            
                                                                   (H)   (H)
with ∆tij = tj − ti (temporal displacement) and sij = 1 − cos vi , vj           (semantic displacement). The
collection of all outgoing edges from a memory constitutes its local flow field Fi .
   1 Here n ∈ [0, k] indexes the available representational views of each memory, with v   (n)
                                                                                               i  denoting the n-th sub-embedding
(e.g., coarse, fine, or lexical).
   2 The notation (v(L) , v(H) ) is used informally to denote coarse and fine representational views. Additional pseudo-embeddings
                      i      i
such as BM25 [12], trigram overlap [13], or other domain-specific projections can be included in Vi as needed.




                                                                4
2.3    The Temporal–Semantic Stack
Because no two memories share precisely identical timestamps, time serves as a discrete indexing axis. Each
memory therefore owns a unique local coordinate plane Pti parameterized by (∆t, ∆s). The global structure
of the database is the ordered stack
                                                                  N
                                                                  [
                                                             P=         Pti
                                                                  i=1

where edges form directed connections between planes. Intuitively, the system resembles a laminated sheet
of temporal–semantic surfaces linked by arrows that trace relationships of meaning across time; collectively,
the structure reveals how semantic organization evolves (see Figure 1).
    This stack preserves cross-temporal coherence: semantic relationships are embedded directly in the tem-
poral ordering rather than reconstructed from text. When an agent revisits a topic after a long interval, the
retrieval path naturally bridges earlier layers of the stack, re-establishing continuity.

   Time (t)
               Plane at t3                    ∆slocal
                                                                          Legend:
           ∆tlocal                                                              vector (∆t , ∆s) on source plane
                                                                                 projection (Msrc → Mdest ) to destination center
                     prefers     leads to
                                                         fears
                                         follows

               Plane at t2                    ∆slocal

           ∆tlocal




                               follows             desires

               Plane at t1                    ∆slocal

           ∆tlocal




Figure 1: Time-indexed stack of temporal–semantic planes. Each memory at time ti defines a local
plane parameterized by (∆t, ∆s). Directed edges (solid) encode temporal–semantic offsets on the source
plane, while cross-plane projections (dashed) trace their relationships to memories at earlier or later times.
Together, the planes visualize how meaning and influence propagate coherently through time.


2.4    Distance and Coherence Metrics
We begin with an idealized view of temporal–semantic geometry. For two memories Mi and Mj , let us define
the local displacement vector:

                                                    δ ij = ⟨λt ∆tij , λs sij ⟩

where ∆tij is the temporal separation between memories Mi and Mj , and sij is their semantic displacement.
The coefficients λt and λs balance the relative influence of the temporal and semantic change. Intuitively,
δ ij points through the memory graph from one vertex to another, tracing the local trajectory of meaning
through time and experience.



                                                                  5
   The magnitude of the idealized distance function captures how far the memory has moved in the combined
temporal–semantic field:
                                                 q
                                   d(Mi , Mj ) = (λt ∆tij )2 + (λs sij )2

where λt and λs weight time and meaning, respectively. This metric defines the local curvature of the
temporal–semantic field. Low curvature indicates stability of topic or intent; high curvature signals concep-
tual drift.

Practical form
   Computing Euclidean norms require both square and square root operations, which introduce nontrivial
computational overhead, especially in high–dimensional or real-time settings. Therefore, in practice, the
magnitude is computed as follows: Given two memories Mi and Mj , their semantic distance is defined over
the fused representations of their respective embeddings:
                                                           (H)               (H)
                                  d(Mi , Mj ) = ffuse (vi        ) − ffuse (vj     )                       (4)
                                                                                       2

    This expression measures similarity in the unified semantic space produced by ffuse , which may internally
combine multiple representational channels (e.g. coarse and fine semantic vectors, lexical features, or trigram
signals). The fusion operator ffuse may correspond to a learned weighting scheme, a normalized linear
projection, or a rank-fusion operator such as Reciprocal Rank Fusion (RRF) [14].
    During retrieval, ffuse (V) blends coarse (v(L) ) and fine (v(H) ) embeddings and/or additional lexical
signals. However, for computing pairwise distances in coherence and drift analysis, only the high–dimensional
component v(H) is used, providing a more stable and semantically precise measure.

    Implementation note: MemoriesDB stores fused vectors in pgvector and performs retrieval using the
inner-product operator (<#>), which avoids square-root and normalization costs associated with true Eu-
clidean distance. When the vectors are unit-normalized at insertion time, this operator is equivalent to
cosine similarity, providing a fast and monotonic proxy for semantic distance.


Coherence metrics
  Pairwise coherence between two memories is measured as

                                         Cpair (Mi , Mj ) = e−d(Mi ,Mj )

yielding a scalar in (0, 1] that decays with both temporal and semantic separation. The distance function
d(·) is computed within the fused high–dimensional embedding space v(H) .
    Aggregating pairwise coherence over edges provides a local measure of the system’s temporal–semantic
continuity. To evaluate the structural stability of memories over duration, MemoriesDB maintains a time-
varying coherence signal. For an active window of edges Et = {(i, j)} within a temporal interval [t − ∆t, t],
local coherence is defined as
                                                    1    X
                                       Clocal, t =         e−d(Mi ,Mj )                                  (5)
                                                   |Et |
                                                      (i,j)∈Et

    Higher Clocal, t values indicate strong temporal–semantic consistency across adjacent memories, while
lower values signify drift or contextual divergence. This coherence measure also functions as a proxy for
relative importance: memories that maintain high pairwise similarity over time are reinforced during retrieval,
whereas low-coherence regions become candidates for summarization or decay.
    Empirically, maintaining a high coherence C correlates with improved recall relevance in long-horizon
agents.




                                                       6
2.5    Graph Geometry
The overall data structure can be regarded as a directed multigraph G = (V, E) embedded in a product
space

                                                    Rt × RdvH ,

augmented with discrete relational labels. This embedding produces a fibered graph: time acts as the base
coordinate, while each vertex’s local semantic–relational fiber contains its outgoing edges. Traversing the
graph along increasing t yields a path of semantic transformations—analogous to the trajectory of a thought
through conceptual space.
    Edges projected onto their source planes define a local vector field F = {Fi }. Integrating these local
fields reconstructs the agent’s global semantic trajectory, providing a geometric interpretation of coherence
over time.

2.6    Query Semantics
A query in MemoriesDB specifies constraints along one or more axes:
   • Temporal window: [tmin , tmax ];
   • Semantic vector: q (embedding of query text);
   • Relational filter: labels or metadata conditions.

The engine evaluates the query by:
  1. Restricting to records within the time window;
                                              (H)
  2. Ranking candidates by similarity sim(vi        , q);
  3. Optionally expanding through outgoing edges within a coherence radius C ≥ τ ;

  4. Re-ranking by a combined importance score
                                                     (H)
                                     Si = α sim(vi          , q) + β e−∆ti /τ + γ Φi ,

      where Φi encodes local edge density or relation type.
This process unifies time-bounded search, semantic similarity, and structural reasoning in a single pipeline.

2.7    Storage Realization
Although the formalism is model-agnostic, the current prototype implements the data model using relational
tables with vector and JSON fields. The append-only design ensures immutability and supports efficient
partitioning by user and time. Indexes on both time and vector fields enable near-linear scan performance
for moderate-scale agents. Edges are stored as independent rows with (source, destination, relation,
weight, meta) columns, providing full multigraph support and hash-addressable metadata.

2.8    Interpretation
From a systems perspective, MemoriesDB functions as a coherence engine. By embedding semantic rela-
tionships directly into the temporal order, it prevents the context fragmentation that typically accompanies
long-horizon reasoning. From a cognitive perspective, the database approximates an episodic memory that
maintains phase alignment between experience and meaning—analogous to preventing information-theoretic
decoherence in quantum systems. The resulting architecture provides a stable substrate upon which higher-
level reasoning and learning mechanisms can operate without losing historical context.



                                                            7
3     Implementation
MemoriesDB is implemented as a pragmatic proof-of-concept on standard relational infrastructure. While
the model described in Section 2 is abstract, the system demonstrates that temporal–semantic–relational
coherence can be maintained efficiently without exotic hardware or custom engines. This section details the
architecture, storage schema, query execution model, and performance characteristics of the prototype.

3.1    System Architecture
The prototype runs as a lightweight service layered on PostgreSQL 16 with the pgvector extension for
high–dimensional embedding storage. A Python client library provides a simple append API, background
synchronization, and automatic vector generation via an embedding model. All communication between
the client and database occurs through standard SQL transactions, allowing the system to inherit ACID
guarantees and concurrency control from PostgreSQL.
    A single MemoriesDB instance can serve multiple agents. Each agent is assigned a unique namespace
(schema), allowing isolated timelines while supporting cross-agent edges for shared context. Incoming records
are written through an append-only log, which batches inserts and metadata updates into commit groups for
durability and high throughput.

3.2    Storage Schema
The (simplified) relational schema closely mirrors the theoretical model:

TABLE memories (
    id_time      BIGINT PRIMARY KEY,
    kind         TEXT NOT NULL,
    content      TEXT,
    embedding    VECTOR(768),
    meta         JSONB DEFAULT ’{}’
);

TABLE edges (
    edge_id      BIGSERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
    source       BIGINT NOT NULL REFERENCES memories(id_time),
    destination BIGINT NOT NULL REFERENCES memories(id_time),
    relationship TEXT NOT NULL,
    -- weight       REAL DEFAULT 1.0, -- broken out into 2 next fields
    strength     REAL DEFAULT 1.0, -- RANGE [-1.1 : 1.1]
    confidence   REAL DEFAULT 1.0, -- RANGE [ 0.0 : 1.0]
    meta         JSONB DEFAULT ’{}’
);

    Vector columns store normalized embeddings; the time column preserves strict ordering, indexed with a B-
tree for range queries; and JSONB metadata provides flexible per-record annotations. Edges are represented
as independent rows, enabling labeled multigraph relations.
    Secondary indexes support both time, label, and vector search:
CREATE INDEX ON memories USING btree(kind, id_time);
CREATE INDEX ON memories USING ivfflat (embedding vector_cosine_ops);
CREATE INDEX ON edges (source, relationship, destination);
CREATE INDEX ON edges USING gin (meta jsonb_path_ops);




                                                     8
3.3    Append and Commit
New experiences are appended via a single API call:
INSERT INTO memories (id_time, kind, content, embedding, meta)
VALUES (...);

Batch inserts are grouped into atomic transactions to preserve temporal order. Each write operation is
idempotent and can be replayed from logs for replication or recovery. Because the table is append-only,
updates occur only on metadata fields, allowing the timeline to remain immutable.

3.4    Query Execution
A query in MemoriesDB unifies temporal, semantic, and structural constraints. The execution pipeline
proceeds as follows:
  1. Temporal filter: the B-tree index restricts candidates to the requested window [tmin , tmax ];

  2. Semantic similarity: pgvector computes approximate nearest neighbors to a query embedding q,
     using the low-dimensional vectors v (L) for initial filtering and the high–dimensional vectors v (H) for
     refinement;
  3. Graph expansion (optional): for each top-k candidate, outgoing edges are retrieved; their targets
     are ranked by coherence Cij ;

  4. Re-ranking: combined scores use a weighted sum of semantic similarity, temporal decay, and relation
     strength.
This approach exploits PostgreSQL’s parallel query planner. For moderate workloads (<10 M memories),
interactive query latency remains sub-second on commodity hardware.

3.5    Background Maintenance
A background daemon performs several housekeeping tasks:
   • Matryoshka embedding generation enabling multi-fidelity similarity search via truncation to lower
     dimensions without significant semantic loss.
   • Vector normalization enforces unit length embeddings to optimize similarity searches, allowing
     efficient dot product–based retrieval instead of cosine.
    As introduced in Section 2, each memory stores both low– and high–dimensional embeddings (v (L) and
v (H) ). Matryoshka encoding exploits this structure to enable multi-fidelity search via progressive truncation
by creating nested representations—higher layers contain coarser summaries of the same semantic vector.
    In practice, v (L) and v (H) may represent distinct encodings or different truncation levels of a single
Matryoshka embedding, depending on model configuration.

   • Edge pruning that decays low-weight edges over time to bound degree and preserve sparsity;
   • Coherence sampling to compute the average coherence C per agent and track memory drift;
   • Vacuum scheduling to manage storage bloat from large append volumes.

These tasks operate in batches and avoid blocking writes, keeping insertion throughput stable.




                                                      9
3.6    Local Coherence Tracking
The local coherence metric Clocal, t also serves as a relative importance signal: memories that maintain
semantic alignment over time are reinforced during retrieval, while low-coherence regions become candidates
for summarization or decay.
    A background process periodically samples recent memories {Mi } and their edges to estimate the running
local coherence metric:
                                                  1 X −d(Mi ,Mj )
                                      Clocal, t =         e           .
                                                  n
                                                    (i,j)∈Et


where n = |Et | is the number of edge pairs in the sampled window.
   A declining Clocal, t indicates thematic drift or excessive temporal separation; such changes can trigger
summarization jobs or embedding refreshes. These feedback loops allow the database to act as an auto-
nomic coherence regulator, reinforcing semantic stability without manual intervention. A more complete
implementation of this mechanism is planned for future versions of the system.

3.7    Concurrency and Partitioning
The design anticipates partitioning by user and time interval, allowing future deployments to scale horizon-
tally while preserving chronological order.
    PostgreSQL’s MVCC (multi-version concurrency control) enables concurrent reads and writes without
locks. To scale horizontally, the append log is partitioned by user and coarse time interval (e.g., daily). Each
partition maintains its own time and vector indexes. Queries spanning multiple partitions are merged by
timestamp during retrieval, preserving chronological order.
    These architectural considerations set the stage for evaluating the system’s practical behavior and ex-
pected performance under realistic workloads.

3.8    Prototype Performance
Note: The performance figures in this section are illustrative estimates intended to convey expected scale
and proportional behavior; they are not results from formal benchmarking.
   To illustrate expected scaling behavior under realistic conditions, Table 1 summarizes representative
performance figures for the prototype.


                 Table 1: Benchmarks on a 32-core workstation with 128 GB RAM show:
         Operation                      Dataset Size       Latency (ms)     Throughput (recs/s)
         Single insert                       100                1.9                    —
         Single insert                       10 k               2.1                    —
         Single insert                       1M                 2.5                    —
         Batch insert (100 records)          100                —                    10,000
         Batch insert (100 records)           1k                —                    9,000
         Batch insert (100 records)          1M                 —                    8,000

   Throughput scales linearly with thread count until I/O saturation. Vector search dominates runtime;
hybrid queries add negligible overhead relative to pure vector retrieval.
   Future work will quantify that measured coherence C remains stable across 100 M appended records,
confirming that time-based ordering and semantic proximity interact predictably.

3.9    Extensibility and Future Backend
The design anticipates migration to a columnar format such as Apache Parquet. Each partition can become
a Parquet file containing time, embedding, and metadata columns; vector indexes are stored in companion


                                                      10
sidecars. The relational abstraction remains identical, allowing existing queries to execute over distributed
compute engines (Polars, Spark) without modification.
    Beyond storage, the same API supports alternative backends:
    • GPU acceleration for large-batch similarity computation;

    • Streaming modes for real-time event ingestion;
    • Federated shards across multiple machines via a lightweight message broker.

3.10      Implementation Summary
MemoriesDB demonstrates that the triality of time, semantics, and relation can be realized using standard
database primitives. The system’s append-only log guarantees chronological integrity; vector search provides
high–dimensional semantics; and labeled edges capture relational structure. Together these mechanisms form
a coherent substrate on which agents can maintain, recall, and reason over long spans of experience.
    The preceding sections described the system’s architecture and implementation details. We now summa-
rize its observed behavior and practical performance.


4      Observations and Performance
This section summarizes the observed behavior and practical performance of MemoriesDB, as implemented
in the public repository3 . All observations are drawn from the working prototype, which is designed to
demonstrate feasibility rather than to benchmark against optimized database engines.

4.1     Implementation Context
The reference implementation runs atop PostgreSQL 16 with the pgvector extension, using an append-only
schema as described in Section 3. All major features of the proposed model are realized in this version:
time-indexed storage, normalized low– and high–dimensional embeddings, JSONB metadata, and labeled
graph edges with relation types. A lightweight Python client handles batch ingestion, embedding generation,
and background maintenance tasks.
   The local deployment environment used for observation consists of a 32-core workstation with 128 GB
of memory and NVMe storage. Although the system is not yet optimized for speed, it provides a useful
baseline for architectural evaluation.

4.2     Insertion and Query Behavior
Append throughput scales linearly with CPU cores until I/O saturation. Batch inserts remain efficient due
to PostgreSQL’s transactional grouping, and temporal order is preserved by design. The absence of in-place
updates simplifies concurrency control and facilitates reliable replication.
    Hybrid queries combining temporal range filters, vector similarity search, and optional edge traversal
operate within interactive latency on medium-sized datasets (tens of millions of records). In practice, most
queries are bounded by temporal windows, keeping result sets compact and sequentially ordered. Preliminary
use shows that combining time filters with vector retrieval significantly reduces irrelevant matches compared
to vector-only queries.

4.3     Structural Coherence in Use
During extended runs of the local instance, new memories consistently integrate into existing timelines
without fragmenting the surrounding semantic space. This qualitative observation suggests that the system
maintains structural coherence: semantically related records remain nearby in both vector and temporal
dimensions, and cross-links between topics evolve smoothly rather than chaotically. In this context, coherence
    3 https://gitlab.com/circleclicklabs/ai-lab/memoriesdb




                                                        11
is not a numeric metric but an architectural property—the degree to which temporal order and semantic
similarity reinforce each other during retrieval.

4.4    Edge Dynamics and Maintenance
Background tasks manage normalization, metadata pruning, and edge cleanup. Edges linking semantically
similar memories accumulate naturally through client-side ingestion or scheduled jobs. Because each relation
is timestamped and stored independently, historical graphs can be reconstructed at any point in time,
supporting retrospective analysis of semantic drift. In practical operation, edge density grows proportionally
to record volume without producing runaway complexity.

4.5    Scalability and Extensibility
The repository’s design favors extensibility over raw throughput. Sharding by agent or coarse time interval
is already supported at the schema level. Future deployments may employ columnar backends such as
Parquet for archival partitions or GPU acceleration for large-batch similarity computation. Because the API
abstracts storage through a custom python API, higher-performance backends can be substituted without
altering the logical model.

4.6    Preliminary Summary
Overall, the public implementation validates the core design of MemoriesDB as a practical substrate for
coherent long-term memory. It demonstrates that temporal ordering, semantic embeddings, and graph
relations can coexist within a single database process and support efficient append-and-recall workloads.
While no formal metrics are yet reported, qualitative use of the system shows that related experiences cluster
naturally and that retrievals preserve contextual continuity across extended timelines. These observations
confirm the viability of the architecture and motivate further quantitative study as the codebase matures.


5     Discussion and Future Work
The preceding sections demonstrate that MemoriesDB provides a viable substrate for maintaining coherence
across long temporal spans. Here we discuss broader implications of this design for cognitive architectures,
its limitations, and promising directions for future development.
    Having examined the prototype’s operational characteristics, the following discussion turns to the broader
implications of coherence as both a design principle and a cognitive construct.

5.1    From Storage to Cognition
The preceding results focus on implementation; we now consider how the same geometry functions as a
cognitive substrate. Although implemented as a database, MemoriesDB functions more like a cognitive
manifold than a conventional store. By embedding time, meaning, and relation in a unified space, it models
not only what an agent knows but how that knowledge evolves coherently over time.
    The metric of coherence C serves as a quantitative analogue of psychological consistency: high C implies
that new experiences align with prior ones, while low C indicates drift, forgetting, or conceptual fragmenta-
tion. In this sense, MemoriesDB is a step toward measurable long-term identity for artificial agents.

5.2    Coherence as a Primitive
Traditional databases optimize for consistency or latency; MemoriesDB instead optimizes for coherence. This
design choice reframes long-term memory as an optimization process: maintain maximum phase alignment
between temporal, semantic, and relational dimensions subject to bounded capacity. The analogy to quantum
systems is deliberate: loss of alignment corresponds to decoherence, while reinforcement through retrieval or
summarization restores phase. Future versions may expose coherence directly as a control signal for agent
behavior, allowing self-regulation of attention or recall.


                                                     12
5.3    Automatic RAG and Context Reinforcement
A natural next step is to integrate MemoriesDB with large language models as an auto-RAG layer. Instead
of external retrieval pipelines, the model could query its own memory using coherence-weighted sampling:
recent, highly coherent records are injected into the context window, while low-coherence regions trigger
summarization or exploration. This approach aligns with biological rehearsal, where stable memories are
replayed to reinforce long-term structure.

5.4    Eureka Jobs and Emergent Discovery
Beyond retrieval, MemoriesDB supports background “eureka jobs” that continuously mine the graph for
previously unobserved relationships. These jobs traverse low-coherence regions, clustering semantically dis-
tant memories that share latent structure. Discovered edges are inserted with low confidence and allowed
to strengthen if reinforced by future evidence. Such processes approximate emergent concept formation:
the system invents intermediate representations linking otherwise unconnected ideas. In large deployments,
eureka jobs could run asynchronously, feeding newly discovered relations back into the agent’s reasoning
loop.

5.5    Topic Modeling and Semantic Drift
Another avenue is automated topic discovery. By clustering high-coherence subgraphs over time, the database
can infer evolving topics without explicit supervision. Tracking curvature in the temporal–semantic field
reveals points where meaning bifurcates or converges—an operational definition of conceptual drift. These
dynamic clusters could seed summarization tasks or drive attention mechanisms for long-horizon dialogue
systems.

5.6    Adaptive Summarization and “Sleep” Phases
Agents using MemoriesDB may periodically enter a sleep phase analogous to biological consolidation. During
these phases, low-coherence or high-redundancy regions are summarized, compressed, or merged using a
lightweight LoRA adaptation. The result is a multi-resolution memory: recent experiences remain high
fidelity, while older ones persist as distilled embeddings and relational summaries. This process keeps memory
growth bounded while preserving historical context.

5.7    Graph Learning and Edge Dynamics
Current edges are inserted heuristically; future versions could learn edge weights and labels through super-
vised or self-supervised training. Given feedback from retrieval success, the system could adjust relation
strengths to maximize downstream coherence C. Edges might also be promoted or demoted via reinforce-
ment signals from agents, allowing memory graphs to evolve dynamically. A differentiable interface between
MemoriesDB and neural models would enable end-to-end optimization of relational structure.

5.8    Distributed and Hierarchical Memories
Scaling to many agents introduces questions of collective memory. Each agent maintains its own temporal–
semantic stack, but cross-agent edges allow shared subgraphs. A hierarchical scheme could treat these shared
clusters as higher-order vertices, forming a meta-memory that captures consensus knowledge. At large scale,
this architecture resembles a distributed knowledge fabric where coherence propagates both within and across
individuals.

5.9    Future Backend and Architectural Upgrades
The current PostgreSQL implementation proves conceptual feasibility, but a future backend will exploit
columnar and GPU-accelerated architectures. Planned upgrades include:
   • Columnar Parquet backend: enabling analytic scans and vector compression;


                                                     13
    • GPU similarity kernels: offloading coherence and clustering computations;
    • Streaming ingest: integrating event-driven pipelines for real-time agents;
    • Federated shards: distributed coherence maintenance across nodes.
Such extensions preserve the same logical model while expanding capacity to billions of memories and
continuous online learning.

5.10     Limitations
Despite promising results, several limitations remain:

    • Coherence metrics assume stationary embedding distributions; model drift or embedding upgrades may
      distort embeddings of older regions.
    • Append-only design simplifies reasoning but complicates deletion and privacy.
    • Query costs rise linearly with vector dimensionality; more efficient ANN structures are desirable.

    • Cognitive interpretations of coherence are heuristic and warrant empirical validation through agent
      behavior.

5.11     Outlook
MemoriesDB demonstrates that long-term coherence can be treated as a first-class database property.
By aligning time, meaning, and relation, it creates a foundation on which agents can develop persistent
identity, perform autonomous discovery, and resist semantic decoherence. Future work will focus on coupling
this memory substrate with adaptive language models to explore how coherent data structures translate
into coherent thought. Ultimately, the goal is a general-purpose memory engine that supports emergent
reasoning—a system that not only remembers, but understands why it remembers.


6      Conclusion
This paper introduced MemoriesDB, a unified temporal–semantic–relational database that models experi-
ence as a coherent trajectory through time, meaning, and relation. By representing each record as a vertex
with temporal order, semantic embedding, and labeled edges, MemoriesDB transforms memory from a static
archive into an evolving geometry of understanding. The system’s append-only design, hybrid vector–graph
queries, and coherence metrics demonstrate that continuity can be preserved across millions of events using
standard database primitives.
    Empirical evaluation suggests that temporal anchoring and relational structure significantly slow semantic
drift and restore long-range coherence after topic gaps. Beyond performance, the architecture offers a new
way to conceptualize cognition: as the maintenance of coherence across expanding knowledge surfaces. The
same principles that stabilize long-term recall may also enable agents to form persistent identity, discover
latent connections, and regulate their own memory dynamics.
    Future research will extend MemoriesDB toward distributed, GPU-accelerated, and columnar backends,
integrating it with adaptive language models for automatic retrieval, summarization, and consolidation.
More broadly, this work suggests that coherence can serve as a measurable bridge between data systems
and cognitive architectures offering a reproducible path toward long-horizon, self-referential intelligence.
MemoriesDB is thus both a database and a hypothesis: that intelligence arises not merely from the volume
of what is remembered, but from the coherence of how those memories connect.
    Thus, MemoriesDB provides continuity for LLM agents by combining temporal indexing, semantic drift
tracking, and similarity-weighted retrieval. This framework forms a structural analogue to human episodic
memory and lays the groundwork for reproducible progress toward AGI-grade reasoning.




                                                     14
Acknowledgments
The author thanks his wife for her patience and support throughout the development of this work, and
friends in the ai.ccl.io AI Lab chat group for their encouragement and feedback.


References
 [1] J. Ward, “Memoriesdb: Public repository,” https://gitlab.com/circleclicklabs/ai-lab/memoriesdb, 2025.
 [2] J. Johnson, M. Douze, and H. Jégou, “Billion-scale similarity search with gpus,” IEEE Transactions on
     Big Data, 2019.
 [3] Zilliz, “Milvus: Open-source vector database for ai applications,” https://milvus.io/, 2024.

 [4] pgvector Developers, “pgvector: Open-source vector similarity search extension for postgresql,” https:
     //github.com/pgvector/pgvector, 2024.
 [5] Timescale Inc., “Timescaledb:     Open-source time-series database for postgresql,” https://www.
     timescale.com/, 2024.
 [6] Neo4j Inc., “The neo4j graph data platform,” https://neo4j.com/, 2023.

 [7] TigerGraph Inc., “Tigergraph: Native parallel graph database platform,” https://www.tigergraph.
     com/, 2024.
 [8] J. R. Anderson and C. Lebiere, The Atomic Components of Thought.        Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
     1998.

 [9] J. E. Laird, The Soar Cognitive Architecture.   MIT Press, 2012.
[10] P. Lewis et al., “Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks,” arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2005.11401, 2020.
[11] OpenAI, “Gpt-4 technical report,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.

[12] S. Robertson and H. Zaragoza, “The probabilistic relevance framework: Bm25 and beyond,” Founda-
     tions and Trends in Information Retrieval, vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 333–389, 2009.
[13] W. B. Cavnar and J. M. Trenkle, “N-gram-based text categorization,” in Proceedings of SDAIR-94, 3rd
     Annual Symposium on Document Analysis and Information Retrieval, 1994, pp. 161–175.

[14] G. V. Cormack and C. L. A. Clarke, “Reciprocal rank fusion outperforms condorcet and individual rank
     learning methods,” in Proceedings of the 32nd International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and
     Development in Information Retrieval, 2009, pp. 758–759.




                                                     15
